In the year 1812,
a Swiss explorer and eccentric named
Johann Ludwig Burckhardt was travelling in
the Middle East,
in the region of what is today Jordan.
Burckhardt was a strange and colorful
character.
Born on the shores of Lake Geneva, he had
traveled to England to study, and there
had been employed by a group known as
the African Association, a gathering of
upper-class Englishmen who financed
expeditions of exploration.
They had given Burckhardt the task of
crossing the Sahara Desert from Cairo
and making contact with what was then
considered a lost city,
the city of Timbuktu.
Burckhardt took his assignment seriously,
and he threw himself into it with all
the energy of a true Georgian eccentric.
He began to study Arabic at Cambridge
University, and while there he began
dressing in traditional Arab clothing,
wearing long, white dishdashas and a
turban, much to the bemusement of his
fellow students.
After graduating, he moved to Syria and
spent two years there practicing his
Arabic, even adopting the name
Sheikh Ibrahim Ibn Abdallah, and attempting to
pass himself off as a Muslim.
It's not clear how successful Burckhardt's
disguise really was or whether anyone in
the Arab world was fooled.
In preparation for his great journey, he
set out on a number of expeditions into
the Syrian Desert, but many of these
ended in disaster.
He was robbed on a number of occasions,
often by the same people he had hired to
act as security on the journey.  But his
desire for adventure was unabated by
these setbacks, and in 1812 he set out on
the journey from Syria to Cairo with the
intention there of securing passage
across the great sandy sea of the Sahara.
It was on this journey, taking the more
dangerous inland route through the
baking summer heat of the desert, that
Burckhardt would make quite a different
discovery.
It was here that his guides told him of
a series of mysterious ruins hidden in a
narrow valley nearby which was known by
locals as Wadi Mousa, or the Valley of
Moses.
At this point, Burckhardt was still in
disguise as an Arab,
and he contrived an excuse to visit the
ruins,
as he writes in his diary.
August 22nd, 1812;
I was particularly desirous of visiting
Moses' Valley,
the antiquities of which I had heard the
country people speak in terms of great
admiration.
I hired a guide at Eldjy to conduct me
there, and paid him with a pair of old
horseshoes.
He carried the goat and gave me a skin
of water to carry, as he knew that there
was no water in the valley below.
As Burckhardt traveled with his guide
down into the dry valley, he began to
feel increasingly fearful that someone
would see through his disguise and his
ruse would be discovered.
In following the rivulet of Eldjy westwards,
the valley soon narrows again, and it is
here that the antiquities of Wadi Mousa
begin.
Of these, I regret I am not able to give
a very complete account, but I knew well
the character of the people around me.
I was without protection in the midst of
a desert where no traveller had ever
before been seen,
and a close examination of these works
of the infidels, as they are called, would
have excited suspicions that I was a
magician in search of treasures. Future
travelers may visit the spot under the
protection of an armed force, and the
antiquities of Wadi Mousa will then be
found to rank amongst the most curious
remains of ancient art.
Burckhardt's guides led him towards what
from a distance appeared to be a sheer
cliff of brilliant red sandstone. But as
he drew closer, he saw a well-concealed
ravine opening up in the stone wall, from
which a sparse stream was flowing.
The valley seemed to be entirely closed
by high rocks, but upon a nearer approach
I perceived a chasm about 15 or 20 feet
in breadth, through which the rivulet
flows westward in winter.
The precipices on either side of the
torrent are about 80 feet in height.
In many places, the opening between them
at the top is less than at the bottom,
and the sky is not visible from below.
As Burckhardt traveled down this shady
chasm, his sense of excitement gradually
grew to wonder as he came upon the sight
of an enormous tomb
carved into the very rock of the red
sandstone mass around him.
In continuing along the winding passage,
an excavated mausoleum came in view,
the situation and beauty of which are
calculated to make an extraordinary
impression upon the traveler, after
having traversed for nearly half an hour
such a gloomy and almost subterraneous
passage as I have described.
The natives call this monument Kaszr
Faraoun, or Pharaoh's Castle,
and pretend that it was the residence of
a prince.
But it was rather the sepulcher of a
prince,
and great must have been the opulence of
a city which could dedicate such
monuments to the memory of its rulers.
It's clear that the sight of this hidden
wonder had an enormous effect on
Burckhardt, and he writes breathlessly in
his diary about the sight of this
enormous edifice.
It is one of the most elegant remains of
antiquity existing in Syria. Its state of
preservation resembles that of a
building recently finished, and on closer
examination, I found it to be a work of
immense labor.
The colonnade is about 35 feet high and
the columns are about three feet in
diameter, with Corinthian capitals.
The colonnade is crowned with a pediment
which consisted of an insulated cylinder
crowned with a vase, standing between two
other structures in the shape of small
temples supported by short pillars.
The entire front, from the base of the
columns to the top of the ornaments, may
be 60 or 65 feet.
Johann Burckhardt would be the first
European in modern times to set foot in
a city that for much of the previous
millennium had been only a legend.
This was the ancient city of Petra.
For centuries, it had been the heart of a
powerful trading kingdom that controlled
the flow of spice and incense coming
across the desert from the lands of the
east.
Its people had built vast constructions
carved with immaculate skill into the
sandstone bedrock of the desert itself,
and tamed one of the harshest
environments to be found on planet earth.
They had fought and traded with empires
and played a starring role in many of
the historical dramas of their age.
They were called the Nabataeans.
As Burckhardt wandered through the gullies
and chasms of that lost city, he must
have wondered how such a society had
flourished out here in the harsh
landscape of the Arabian Desert.
If so great a civilization had
arisen here, what had happened to empty
its temples and streets and leave it to
be buried in the wandering sands of the
desert?
My name's Paul Cooper, and you're
listening to The Fall of Civilizations
Podcast.
Each episode, I look at a civilization of
the past that rose to glory and then
collapsed into the ashes of history.
I want to ask, what did they have in common?
What led to their fall? And what did it
feel like to be a person alive at the
time who witnessed the end of their
world?
In this episode, I want to look at one of
the most remarkable stories of
civilizational survival to come down to
us from the ancient world,
the story of the trading empire of the
Nabataeans.
I want to explore how these once humble
traders rose to become masters of the
desert sands and to defy empires.
I want to show how the city of Petra
flourished to become the crossroads of
the world,
and I want to explore what happened to
finally bring down the empire of
Nabataea.
Sandstone is a sedimentary rock.
It's formed when layers of sand are
piled one upon another, and then over
time subjected to enormous pressure.
This pressure, along with natural mineral
processes, fuses the sand grains together
into rock.
Beneath the lands of Jordan, where this
historical drama will unfold,
two great beds of sandstone stretch out.
These are known as Disi sandstone
and Umm Ishrin sandstone.
Disi sandstone is the youngest and
uppermost layer.
Sandstones can be any colour depending
on the kinds of grains that went into
forming it, and this kind is hard, pale
grey, and usually erodes to form
distinctive dome-like structures.
But beneath this layer is a layer of
older sandstone, at least 20 million
years older.
This is Umm Ishrin sandstone,
and it's easily recognizable by the
beautiful patterns it forms.
Due to its composition of iron,
hydroxides, and manganese oxides, it is
famous for its colour,
woven with rich oranges, purples,
and deep, rosy reds.
The winding, interlaced patterns on these
stones were formed by the shapes of
riverbeds that ran across this landscape
as much as 500 million years ago,
in the middle of the period known as the
Cambrian.
During this period, the planet earth
would have looked like a very alien
place, almost like the surface of another
planet.
There were a few plants like mosses and
lichens, but no leaves or trees, and no
animals on the bare, rocky land.
The sea levels were high, with little or
no polar ice, and so, large areas of the
continents were flooded with warm,
shallow seas
filled with some of the largest forms of
life to yet have evolved; crustaceans and
arthropods like trilobites.
Over the hundreds of millions of years
that followed, an enormous amount of sand
was deposited on the floors of these
oceans as their waves ground away at the
rocks of the planet crust, as rainwaters
flowed down through rivers, bringing silt
and dust along with them.
Today, the Umm Ishrin layer of sandstone
is more than half a kilometer thick,
and in most places, it is buried by
sheets of younger grey limestone.
This rosy sandstone would have remained
buried if it weren't for the unique
plate tectonics of the Arabian Peninsula.
The Arabian Plate is currently being
crushed by the other plates around it,
the much larger African and Eurasian
Plates.
It's being pushed north at a rate of 15
millimeters a year,
or about as fast as your fingernails
grow.
As it does so, these enormous forces have
thrown up mountain ranges in Turkey,
Syria, and Iran,
and this vice-like pressure has caused
the land mass to tilt.
All of the rock layers in Jordan now
slope gently towards the northeast. The
upper limestone layer became exposed to
the powerful forces of the wind and sand.
In places like Wadi Rum, Dana, the eastern
shore of the Dead Sea, and at the site of
Petra,
these grey sandstones eroded away,
and the long-buried layers of Umm Ishrin
sandstone came into view in all their
rich, red glory.
It's here in this landscape of rosy
red stone that the story of the
Nabataeans would begin.
The earliest hints of a people who may
have been the Nabataeans comes from the
sources of the late kings of Assyria in
the 8th and 7th centuries BC.
Like many rulers of this region before
them, they had struggled to control the
nomadic tribal peoples living in the
deserts to their south.
The 7th century BC Assyrian king
Sennacherib wrote the following
inscription detailing one of his
campaigns in the south.
In my first campaign,
I accomplished the defeat of Merodach-
-Baladan, King of Babylonia, together with
the army of Elam, his ally in the plain
of Kish. On
my return march, the Tumuna, the Ubudu, the
Damunu, the Nabatu, who were not submissive at
all, all of them I conquered.
Sennacherib's grandson, the king
Ashurbanipal, also wrote of encountering
these desert peoples.
The Nabatu live in a far-off desert
place where there are no wild animals,
and not even birds build their nests.
Today, many scholars dismiss the
similarities between the name of the
ancient Nabatu and the later Nabataeans
as a simple coincidence.
But what we do know is that since the
earliest history of this region, people
have lived in this kind of nomadic
manner in the deserts of Arabia.
These people would have no fixed towns
or cities, no houses or temples, but they
would move with their herds, constructing
tents wherever they went, and moving as
restlessly as the desert sands.
They would survive by raising animals
like goats, sheep, and cows, which could
provide meat, milk, and wool.
They would forage and hunt what they
could from the environment, and would
perhaps plant orchards that they would
return to each year on their wandering
routes.
It seems that during their early history,
the Nabataeans would also act as pirates
and bandits,
using their knowledge of the desert to
outmaneuver the slow-moving trade
caravans that passed through their
territory and along their coast.
The first century Roman writer Strabo
recounts that the Nabataeans even
dabbled in seaborne piracy.
Nabataea is a country with a large
population and well-supplied with
pasturage.
They also dwell on islands situated off
the coast nearby,
and these Nabataeans formally lived a
peaceful life,
but later, by means of rafts, went to
plundering the vessels of people sailing
from Egypt,
but they paid the penalty when a fleet
went over
and sacked their country.
Soon, it seems that the Nabataeans
discovered that it was more profitable
not to rob the trade caravans but to
offer them protection to pass through
their territory for a price,
and from there it was only one small
step to organizing the caravans
themselves.
By the end of the first millennium BC,
the Nabataeans had pushed out their
rivals and now dominated the business of
transporting goods across the deserts of
Arabia.
By the time the first books of the
Hebrew Bible were being written down,
it's clear that the Arab kingdoms of the
south were already making a killing.
In the Book of Kings, 10:15, the following
account is made of the wealth of the
10th century King Solomon, with
particular mention of the wealth of the
Arab kingdoms.
Now, the weight of gold that came to
Solomon in one year
was 603 score and six talents of gold.
Beside that, he had of the merchantmen
and of the traffic of the spice
merchants and of all the kings of Arabia
and of the governors of the country.
The first truly solid account of the
Nabataeans comes secondhand from around
the year
312 BC,
and the Greek writer known as Hieronymus
of Cardia.
Hieronymus wrote an apparently detailed
description of the Nabataean people,
expounding on their history, their
culture, and their way of life. But
unfortunately for us, that text hasn't
survived into the modern day,
but he was used as a major source for
other later scholars like the Greek
historian Diodorus of Sicily, writing
more than 300 years later.
In his work, Diodorus gives a lengthy
description of the Nabataeans based on
the earlier observations of Hieronymus
of Cardia.
He paints a picture of an uncompromising
nomadic people who refused the comforts
of settled society out of a desire for
independence.
For the sake of those who do not know, it
will be useful to state in some detail
the customs of these Arabs, by following
which, it is believed they preserve their
liberty.
They range over a country that is partly
desert and partly waterless, though a
small section of it is fruitful.
They live in the open air, claiming as
native land a wilderness that has
neither rivers nor abundant springs from
which it is possible for a hostile army
to obtain water. It is their custom
neither to plant grain, set out any
fruit-bearing tree, use wine, nor
construct any house, and if anyone is
found acting contrary to this, death is
his penalty.
They follow this custom because they
believe that those who possess these
things are, in order to retain the use of
them, easily compelled by the powerful to
do their bidding.
Diodorus also recounts the great wealth
that the Nabataeans had amassed due to
their control of crucial trade routes
for spices and incense.
Some of them raised their camels, others
sheep, pasturing them in the desert.
While there are many Arab tribes who use
the desert as pasture, the Nabataeans far
surpass the others in wealth, although
they are not much more than ten thousand
in number, for not a few of them are
accustomed to bring down to the sea
frankincense and myrrh and the most
valuable kinds of spices which they
procure from those who convey them.
Frankincense and myrrh are the resins of
two different plants in the Burseraceae
family,
gnarled and stunted trees that grow on
the Arabian Peninsula in India and North
Africa.
When the bark of these trees is damaged,
they have evolved to release resin from
their wounds which forms a glassy seal,
protecting the plant's delicate insides
from further harm.
But trees are also susceptible to
bacterial infections just like we are,
and as an extra line of defense, these
resins are filled with volatile
compounds that kill bacteria and fungi,
similar to our own immune system. It's
these volatile chemicals that also act
in interesting ways on the human sense
of smell.
For at least the last five thousand
years, these resins have been used for
their antibacterial properties in
medicine and for their striking aromas
when burned.
Frankincense releases a sweet and woody
scent with notes of lemon, while myrrh
releases a smell that is more like spice,
bitterer with floral overtones.
At harvest times,
farmers slice gashes into the barks of
the trees and collect the milky resins
that ooze from within.
Once exposed to air and sun, myrrh dries
and hardens to reddish-brown pea-sized
chunks, while frankincense dries to pale
yellow, tear-shaped droplets.
Diodorus of Sicily even claims that the
smells were so strong
that sailors traveling up the coast of
Arabia could smell them as they sailed
past.
A group of Greek sailors who ran out of
supplies on the Arabian coast around the
year 300 AD
landed on the shore in search of water,
and stumbled upon a plantation of these
trees.
They were later interviewed by the
botanist Theophrastes, who wrote down
everything they told him about the
methods of extracting these resins.
They said that on the coasting voyage,
they landed to look for water on the
mountains and saw these trees and the
manner of collecting their gums.
They reported that with both trees,
incisions had been made,
both in the stems and in the branches,
also that in some cases the gum was
dropping, but that in others it remained
sticky to the tree, and that in some
places, mats woven of palm leaves were
put underneath,
while that which remained sticky to the
trees they scraped off with iron tools.
The cultivation of these trees was
veiled in secrecy, and this secrecy gave
rise to outlandish myths.
The historian Herodotus, writing in the
5th century BC,
recorded the process for harvesting
these incenses,
along with an account of a supposed race
of monsters that guarded them.
Arabia is the furthest of the inhabited
lands in the direction of the midday,
and in it alone of all lands grow
frankincense and myrrh.
These are got with difficulty by the
Arabians,
for these trees which produce
frankincense are guarded by winged
serpents,
small in size and of various colors,
which watch in great numbers about each
tree,
and they cannot be driven away from the
trees by any other thing but only the
smoke of the storax.
We will never know whether this was a
simple legend or whether it was a
purposeful piece of disinformation
spread by Arab frankincense farmers to
scare others away from their lucrative
industry.
If this latter was the case, then it
seems to have worked;
the stories of venomous flying snakes
were repeated by a number of other
ancient Greek writers,
and few of those who explored the coast
of Arabia by sea were ever brave enough
to venture inland to see the incense
plantations for themselves.
It's not hard to see
why these commodities were so sought
after.
Towns and cities of the bronze and iron
age would likely have been a potent mix
of pungent smells.
Even in the most refined cities,
sanitation was in its early stages, if it
existed at all,
and little centralized planning would
often mean that waste would build up
close to where people lived and worked.
With no refrigeration, food would spoil
quickly, and industries like leather
tanning used dung and urine to produce
their products. All of this would have
combined to create a heady assault on
the noses of all the people who lived
there.
For the rich, alleviating this
discomfort was something they were
willing to pay for.
Aside from this obvious use, the burning
of incense also took on a significant
spiritual dimension.
Temples and places of religious worship
wanted to create a clear divide between
the inside of the temple, a holy, sacred
space, and the dirty, smelly world outside,
and incense was one of the best ways to
do this.
Since ancient times, people had noticed
the connection between bad smells and
illness and death.
Our sense of smell evolved in part to
protect us from harmful bacteria in
waste and decaying matter,
and so naturally, people noticed that
those who lived close to foul-smelling
places like sewers and waste heaps would
get sick more often and even
die. Since the earliest texts have been
recorded, it's clear that people
considered the presence of bad smells to
be evidence of the existence of evil
spirits, invisible to the eye but
lingering in the air, waiting to cause
disease and misery to the people around
them.
A large part of the responsibility of a
temple was to give people comfort from
the daily horrors of disease and
misfortune, and to do this, they would
need to create a space where these
putrid smells and the evil associated
with them were not allowed entry.
This use of incense to create a sense of
holy space is truly ancient.
It was mentioned as part of rituals in
Homer's Odyssey, and the Book of Exodus
even describes a particular blend of
frankincense and other spices to be
ground and burnt in the sacred altar
before the ark of the covenant, and even
goes so far as to forbid its use for any
other purpose.
Then the Lord said to Moses,
take fragrant spices, gum resin, onycha, and
galbanum,
and pure frankincense all in equal
amounts, and make a fragrant blend of
incense, the work of a perfumer.
It is to be salted and pure
and sacred.
Grind some of it to a powder and place
it in front of the ark of the covenant
law in the tent of meeting.
It shall be most holy to you.
Do not make any incense with this
formula for yourselves.
Whoever makes incense like it to enjoy
its fragrance must be cut off from their
people.
From this connection to the divine,
incense would soon become integral to
the function of royalty.
Myrrh was used in the anointing rituals
of Hebrew queens and in the embalming
process for the mummies of Egyptian
pharaohs.
In the Christian New Testament, the
Gospel of Matthew describes a group of
wise men who travel from the east to
attend the birth of Jesus, and who bring
him the traditional offerings given to
royalty;
gold, frankincense, and myrrh,
gifts designed to reinforce his claim to
being born as King of the Jews and the
descendant of King David.
In other words, incense around this time
was serious business.
These fragrances were not simply
frivolous luxuries, but they were
essential tools in the way that
religious authority and the power of the
state were constructed.
As societies became more centralized and
these institutions grew in power and
wealth, the demand for incense would only
increase.
As the second and first centuries BC
passed by, the Nabataean people found
themselves at the very heart of this
crucial industry.
Camels would soon lumber across the
Nabataean roads with boxes of
frankincense and myrrh from Oman, sacks
of spices from India, and bolts of cloth
from Syria,
as well as sugar and ivory from Africa.
All of this would pass through a
city that sat at the crossroads of
multiple trade routes,
a place that would come to hold a
semi-mythical reputation around the
known world.
To the Nabataeans, this city was known as
Raqm,
but to the people of the wider world, it
would come to be known by the Greek word
for rock, the element from which it was
carved.
This was the city of Petra.
The site of Petra has been inhabited for
at least the last 7,000 years,
and this is partly due to its
interesting geology.
A freshwater spring rises from the
ground here, known as Musa’s Spring, and
it's held in traditional beliefs to be
the place where the biblical figure
Moses once struck a rock with his staff
and caused water to gush from the desert
stones.
The appearance of a spring of water
in this arid desert
really must have seemed miraculous to
the early peoples who settled here.
As rainwaters permeate through these
porous sandstones, they gather in
subterranean pools, and these waters
slowly leech out of the rocks along the
paths of least resistance.
This means that the very stones of
Petra's landscape act like enormous
water towers,
slowly releasing their stores of water
through the long, dry months of the
Arabian summer.
Over millions of years,
these spring waters, along with the brief
but heavy winter rains, have cut through
the sandstone bluffs so that a narrow
ravine known as a Siq wound its way
through the solid stone.
Beyond this was a perfectly enclosed
area
sheltered by high cliffs from the desert
wind and sands,
and with a constant supply of fresh
water.
The first century Roman author and
naturalist, Pliny the Elder, gives one
early account of the city in his work,
Natural History.
The Nabataeans inhabit a town named Petra.
It lies in a deep valley in little less
than two miles wide, and is surrounded by
inaccessible mountains with a river
flowing between them.
At Petra, two roads meet.
Its distance from the town of Gaza on
the Mediterranean coast is 600 miles, and
from the Persian Gulf is
635 miles.
This naturally-occurring spring water
was enough to support a small population,
but as the city's importance grew and
the trade caravans got larger, the strain
on its supply must have grown and grown.
To enhance the natural water systems of
the region, the Nabataeans began to build
complex water control systems, cutting
aqueducts into the sandstone of the
mountains, and even building underground
plumbing systems out of terracotta pipes
to divert the water of several nearby
springs directly into the heart of the
settlement.
They also learned techniques for
gathering rainfall that they used to
enormous effect.
Although the climate of the region
wasn't quite as arid 2,000 years ago as
it is today, this landscape was still a
desert.
Rain in these parts came extremely
rarely,
and the so-called rainy season, around
January, could consist of just one or two
spells of rain in a year. In the height
of summer, rainfall stops entirely.
So, the Nabataeans worked tirelessly
to maximize the amount of water they
could gather during these few rainy
spells.
Rainwater would naturally gather in
depressions and hollows, and for
centuries, herdsmen had taken advantage
of these natural pools.
But sandstone is a porous rock, and the
water would naturally drain away over
time.
To fix this problem, the Nabataeans
worked to line these natural pools with
hard stucco plaster,
meaning that the water would remain and
could be used long into the season of
drought.
They built large dams across the valleys
to gather rainwater into reservoirs and
also reduce the flooding that occurred
each year as rainwater followed the
well-worn channels it had cut for
millions of years through the red rock
of the valley.
The Nabataeans’ expert control of scarce
water resources meant that Petra was
able to grow to eventually house as many
as 20,000 permanent residents
and to support the constant arrival of
large trading caravans, many of them made
up of hundreds of people and camels,
arriving thirsty from the long desert
roads.
Soon, the water was even abundant
enough that it could be used for more
luxurious purposes.
The citizens of Petra would soon be able
to bathe, make wine, cultivate fruit, and
stroll through their streets in the
shade of palm trees.
Archaeology shows that Petra was not
just a city of tombs;
in its time of flourishing, it was
sprawling with lush gardens and pleasant
fountains, enormous temples, and luxurious
villas.
The Roman writer Strabo gives some
glimpse of this.
The metropolis of the Nabataeans is
Petra, as it is called, for it lies on a
site which is otherwise smooth and level,
but it is fortified all around by a rock,
the outside parts of the site being
precipitous and sheer, and the inside
parts having springs in abundance, both
for domestic purposes and for watering
gardens.
Outside the circuit of the rock, most of
the territory is desert, in particular
towards Judaea.
Some of the Nabataeans’ own
inscriptions clearly reference gardens
existing within the city.
The following inscription from a tomb at
Petra illustrates some of the
flourishing plant life that once stood
here and which may have belonged to a
temple,
and its description stands in stark
contrast to the barren sand and stones
that today stretch out around it.
This tomb and the large burial chamber
within it and the small burial chamber
beyond it, the enclosure in front of them,
and the porticos and the rooms within it,
and the gardens and pleasure garden, and
the walls of water, and the cistern and
walls, and all the rest of the property
which in these places are sacred and
dedicated to Dushara, the god of our
lord,
and his sacred throne and all the
gods. Outside the city, in the surrounding
countryside,
water control was even more crucial. Even
with enough water, the Nabataeans still
needed to eat, and to do so, they would
employ a unique style of farming that
maximized the potential of the difficult
terrain.
They would contour a large area of the
land, digging it out into a shallow
funnel sloping down to a single point,
and at this point, they would plant a
single fruit tree.
When the rains came, the water would
drain down to this central point and the
tree could survive. To plant an orchard
of trees using this method, you need
about fifty times the normal space, but it
was an effective technique, and out here
in the desert, one thing the Nabataeans
had no shortage of was space.
The Nabataeans also used their expertise
at water control to enormous strategic
advantage.
Diodorus of Sicily recounts how they
built a system of secret hidden
reservoirs across the desert, meaning
that only they could take advantage of
them, ensuring that no competitors could
move in on their lucrative trade routes.
In times of war, their secret
reservoirs also gave them an advantage
against their enemies,
as Diodorus recalls.
They are exceptionally fond of freedom,
and whenever a strong force of enemies
comes near, they take refuge in the
desert, using this as a fortress, for it
lacks water and cannot be crossed by
others, but to them alone.
Since they have prepared subterranean
reservoirs lined with stucco, the mouths
of which they make very small. After
filling these reservoirs with rainwater,
they close the openings, making them even
with the rest of the ground, and they
leave signs that are known to themselves
but are unrecognizable by others. They
water their cattle every other day so
that if they flee through waterless
places, they may not need a continuous
supply of water.
But despite the immense difficulties of
maintaining this city, its position meant
it was all worth it.
That's because Petra sat at the center
of a spider's web of trade routes
spreading off in every direction.
To the east, desert roads led to the port
towns of Basrah and Dahran
in the Persian Gulf, where spices from
East Asia like cinnamon, ginger, nutmeg,
and pepper flowed, as well as precious
stones from India and fine silks from
China.
From the south, frankincense and myrrh
poured into Petra from the incense
fields of Yemen and Oman.
Petra connected the nearby Red Sea port
of Aqaba with the Mediterranean port
town of Gaza, connecting the markets of
Eastern Africa with those of Europe,
and on the roads to the north lay the
great cities of Damascus and Antioch.
To the west, the roads led from Petra
into Egypt, where tin was in constant
demand, brought from Afghanistan, along
with the brilliant blue stone lapis
lazuli.
The black volcanic glass obsidian was
brought from Abyssinia.
Perfumes and scented oils, as well as
cosmetic powders and eye shadows, flowed
north to Greece, stored in containers
carved from giant clam shells harvested
in the Red Sea.
The tarry substance bitumen was farmed
from the Dead Sea and brought south to
Egypt to help in the embalming process
for mummies and to waterproof the hulls
of ships.
The Nabataeans were so crucial to the
transferring of all of these goods by
land and sea that they were able to
charge a tax
equal to a full quarter of all the goods
that passed through their lands.
As a result, the Nabataeans would soon
grow fabulously, even absurdly, wealthy.
But soon, others would start to look with
jealous eyes to the fortune they had
made.
The Nabataeans were not a warrior people,
and it seems that they preferred,
wherever possible, not to fight.
But they were more than capable of
defending themselves when attacked, as
one colorful episode from their history
shows.
The society of the Nabataeans rose into
a world that still bore the marks of one
of history's most dramatic reshufflings
of power.
Towards the end of the 4th century BC,
the 20-year-old King Alexander of the
mountainous kingdom of Macedon in
northern Greece had embarked on a
ten-year campaign that would see him
topple the Persian Empire and sweep
eastwards to capture vast swathes of
territory throughout Central Asia, even
invading India.
Alexander died in the year 323 BC, in the
city of Babylon,
and his empire immediately disintegrated.
He left in his wake a series of large
Greek kingdoms stretching from Pakistan
to Egypt,
and each of these began fighting with
one another over who would rule the
remnants of the empire.
One of these kingdoms was ruled by a
King Antigonus who had been a general
under Alexander and who had served him
as governor of much of the Middle East.
Antigonus had lost an eye after
apparently being struck by shrapnel from
a splintering catapult bolt while
serving under Alexander's father, and so,
he has gone down in history by the name
Antigonus Monophthalmus, or Antigonus
the One-Eyed.
Antigonus was also mono-maniacal.
He soon embarked on a determined
campaign to reunite Alexander's great
empire and rule over it himself. He
quickly swept through Syria, taking the
lands of his rivals, and conquered down
the Mediterranean coast,
eventually reaching the borders of the
wealthy lands of the Nabataeans.
War is an expensive business, and as with
most warmongers, Antigonus was
permanently short of money.
Soon, he began to look hungrily to the
south, and dreamed of seizing the fabled
wealth of Petra for himself.
In the year 312 BC, he ordered one of his
generals, a man named Athenaeus, to march
into the desert and seize as much as he
could of the wealth of these Nabataean
traders.
The disciplined and battle-hardened
phalanxes of Antigonus were among the
best soldiers in the world,
some having served under Alexander
himself, and these crack troops don't
seem to have expected much of a
challenge.
Athenaeus marched out into the desert
from Judaea with an army made up of 4,000
foot soldiers armed with long pikes, and
600 horsemen,
as Diodorus of Sicily recounts.
Deciding that this people was hostile to
his interests, he selected one of his
friends, Athenaeus, and gave him 4,000
light-foot soldiers and 600 horsemen
fitted for speed, and ordered him to set
upon the barbarians suddenly and cut off
all their cattle as plunder.
It took Athenaeus and his soldiers three
days to travel the 160 kilometers across
the desert,
but soon they came into view of the
legendary stone city.
Athenaeus ordered his men to prepare for
a nighttime attack.
We can imagine the sight of the Greek
army waiting and watching,
as the shadows stretched long over the
rosy stones of the city and the sun sat
in a purply haze over the Jordanian
desert.
When night fell,
the soldiers stormed into the city.
They found it almost completely
undefended.
There seems to have been no permanent
garrison guarding the city of Petra, and
the Nabataean men were away on business.
What followed was a frenzy of looting,
and here we can get a sense for the vast
wealth that had been amassed in this
city.
Athenaeus and his men loaded themselves
with as much frankincense and myrrh as
their animals could carry, and reportedly
made away with nearly 14 tons of silver.
Not content with that, they also rounded
up all of the women and children they
could and abducted them with the
intention of selling them as slaves, as
Diodorus recalls.
Of those that were caught there,
some he slew at once, some he took as
prisoners, and others who were wounded he
left behind,
and of the frankincense and myrrh, he
gathered together the larger part and
about 500 talents of silver.
The Greeks, hardly believing how easy it
had been, marched off with their slaves
and loot as fast as they could, and made
their way back along the road to safety.
Weighed down with treasure and prisoners,
and with their horses no doubt
struggling in the desert landscape,
they traveled about 36 kilometers from
Petra and thought that there would be
safe to make camp.
But they had not reckoned on the
camel-powered armies of the Nabataeans.
Only a few hours after Athenaeus and his
soldiers had left Petra, the first
Nabataean men began to return to the
city.
Finding its houses and temples looted
and their wives and children gone, they
heard about the Greek attack from
wounded survivors and began an immediate
pursuit.
They sent out riders and gathered more
men from every village they passed
through until the Nabataean force had
swollen to a horde of 8,000
camel riders.
They loped across the desert with
exceptional speed,
easily outpacing the Greek horses, and
caught up to Athenaeus’ camp by nightfall.
While the men of Athenaeus’ were encamped
with little thought of the enemy, and
because of their weariness, were in deep
sleep.
Some of their prisoners escaped secretly,
and the Nabataeans, learning from them
the condition of the enemy, attacked the
camp at about the third watch, being no
less than 8,000 in number.
Under cover of darkness, the enraged
Nabataeans swept into the Greek camp and
slaughtered everyone they could find.
Most of the hostile troops they
slaughtered where they lay;
the rest they slew with their javelins
as they awoke and sprang to arms.
In the end,
all the foot soldiers were slain,
but of the horsemen, about fifty escaped, and
of these the larger part were wounded.
When the Nabataeans had manfully
punished the enemy, they themselves
returned to the rock with the property
that they had recovered.
Every single Greek foot soldier was
killed, and only about fifty of the Greek
cavalry were able to flee the scene and
trickle back across the desert.
For the Greeks, this was an incredible
humiliation,
but it's clear the Nabataeans had no
interest in fighting a war. They sent a
message to King Antigonus in Aramaic, the
common language of the ancient Middle
East, explaining why they had wiped out
his army and asking for no further
aggression against them.
The embarrassed Greek king clearly tried
his best to save face.
To Antigonus they wrote a letter in
Syrian characters in which they accused
Athenaeus and vindicated themselves.
Antigonus replied to them, agreeing that
they had been justified in defending
themselves, but he found fault with
Athenaeus, saying that he made the attack
contrary to the instructions he had been
given.
He did this,
hiding his own intentions and desiring
to delude the barbarians into a sense of
security.
The Arabs were highly pleased because
they seemed to have been relieved of
great fears, yet they did not altogether
trust the words of Antigonus.
Regarding their prospects as uncertain,
they placed watchmen upon the hills from
which it was easy to see from a great
distance the passes into Arabia.
This final act of caution seems to have
been completely justified.
In fact, King Antigonus had no intention
of maintaining the peace or accepting
defeat at the hands of a people he
considered to be barbarians.
He ordered his son Demetrius to march
back into the Nabataean lands and
accomplish what Athenaeus could not,
this time with another 4,000 foot
soldiers and a much larger force of
4,000 cavalry.
But Demetrius would not have much more
success.
The watchmen that the Nabataeans had
placed along their borders quickly
spotted the advancing Greeks and lit
warning beacons on the hilltops.
The desert people scattered their flocks,
hiding them away in narrow crevices and
hidden places,
and took all of their precious goods,
women, and children with them.
They all flared to a stony fortress,
possibly a flat-topped mountain named Umm
Al-Biyara, the tallest point around the
city of Petra.
Demetrius, on arriving at the rock and
finding that the flocks had been removed,
made repeated assaults upon the
stronghold.
Those within resisted stoutly and easily
had the upper hand because of the height
of the place. So, on this day, after he
had continued the struggle until evening,
he recalled his soldiers by a trumpet
call.
The Greek general Demetrius was clearly
frustrated.
The single narrow approach up to the
mountain's stronghold made a direct
attack on it virtually impossible, and
it's clear that at least someone among
the Nabataeans had a gift with words.
As Demetrius approached the next day for
a fresh round of assaults, someone called
down from the walls with the following
impassioned plea,
which Diodorus of Sicily recounts.
On the next day, however, when he had
advanced upon the rock, one of the
barbarians called to him, saying, “King
Demetrius, with what desire or under what
compulsion do you war against us who
live in the desert and in a land that
has neither water, nor grain,
nor wine, nor any other thing whatever of
those that pertain to the necessities of
life among you?
For we, since we are in no way willing to
be slaves, have all taken refuge in a
land that lacks all the things that are
valued among other peoples and have
chosen to live a life in the desert,
harming you not at all.
We therefore beg both you and your
father to do us no injury,
but after receiving gifts from us to
withdraw your army and henceforth regard
the Nabataeans as your friends,
for neither can you, if you wish remain
here many days since you lack water and
all other necessary supplies, nor can you
force us to live a different life.
Here, we can see the Nabataeans deploying
both of their great strengths.
Their strategic control of the water,
secreted away in hidden reservoirs, meant
that any protracted siege of the city
was impossible,
and their enormous wealth often meant
that they could simply pay off their
enemies.
Demetrius must have sensed that the
siege was hopeless.
He agreed to accept a payment from the
Nabataeans and marched back to his lands
not exactly victorious, but at least a
good deal richer.
His father, King Antigonus, seems to have
been quite angry at his son's decision,
as Diodorus relates.
Antigonus, when Demetrius returned and
made a detailed report of what he had
done, rebuked him for the treaty with the
Nabataeans, saying that he had made the
barbarians much bolder by leaving them
unpunished,
since it would seem to them that they
had gained pardon not through his
kindness
but through his inability to overcome
them.
This episode gives us a marvelous
glimpse of the unique survival strategy
that the Nabataeans employed,
and shows how they built an empire not
out of conquest and death,
but out of the trickle of fresh water
from the desert rocks and the endless
clinking of silver pieces moving across
the desert from hand to hand.
In telling the story of the Nabataeans,
there will be one voice conspicuously
missing,
and that is the voice of the Nabataeans
themselves.
As far as we can tell,
the Nabataeans had a good level of
literacy, and it seems even common people
could read and write to some extent.
The Nabataean script is a kind of late
Aramaic, ultimately derived from what's
called Imperial Aramaic, which was used
by the Persian Empire.
We have evidence of graffiti written on
stones all over the Jordanian desert,
some apparently left by shepherds who
were capable of writing at least their
own names and some short inscriptions,
but despite this apparently widespread
literacy, no histories or accounts
actually written by Nabataeans have
survived.
We may never know the reasons for this.
It's possible that the tribal roots of
Nabataean society meant that they had
inherited a cast of oral historians and
storytellers whose job it was to
memorize their histories and recite them,
and that while these storytellers were
alive, it simply never seemed necessary
to write those histories down.
It's possible that oral historians of
this kind may even have jealously
guarded their histories, even forbidden
them from being written down, in order to
preserve their own importance and status.
But all of this is speculation, and for
the most part, all the Nabataeans have
left us on this matter is silence.
The almost complete lack of Nabataean
sources means that to tell their story,
we are left searching through the
written records of other societies,
looking for any mention of them.
These mentions are often brief and
fragmentary, and form instantaneous
flashbulb moments in which the
Nabataeans appear suddenly in the
historical record and then disappear
again into darkness.
About fifty years after the incident with
Antigonus the One-Eyed and his two
failed invasions of Nabataea, we get a
colorful account from the papyrus
archives of an Egyptian politician named
Zenon, a right-hand man to the minister
of finance in Ptolemaic Egypt around 259
BC.
One papyrus gives the account of a
chariot driver who had seen two of his
colleagues have an uncomfortable run-in
with a group of Nabataeans.
These two Greek chariot drivers had
apparently been moonlighting as human
traffickers, transporting slave girls and
selling them in the cities they visited.
Memorandum to Zenon from Heraclides the
charioteer,
regarding what was done by Drimylus and
Dionysius to the slave girl,
abusing her and handing her over to a
border guard.
Returning from there, he encountered the
Nabataeans,
and when there was a shout of protest, he
was put under guard and placed in
shackles for seven days.
Concerning further details, if you
question me,
you will learn the entire truth.
This remarkable and enigmatic entry
leaves us with a lot of questions, but it
shows that the Nabataeans were already
familiar figures right across the Middle
East.
It's not clear what caused the
Nabataeans to utter their shout of
protest and imprison these men.
Perhaps it was some personal insult or a
dispute over trade,
but some historians have wondered
whether it shows that the Nabataeans
were offended by the men's treatment of
the women in their captivity and decided
to dole out some justice of their own.
Nabataean culture seems to have held
women in high regard, with queens
appearing alongside kings on certain
coins, and with tomb inscriptions
describing women acting as the heads of
households.
So, it's not far-fetched to imagine
that the Greek's treatment of these
women may have offended the Nabataean's
cultural sensibilities.
Another tantalizing flashbulb comes from
the records of the Roman-Jewish
historian Flavius Josephus, in his
account of the Jewish Maccabee revolt
against the Selucid Empire nearly a
hundred years later.
The revolt was led by a Jewish priest
named Judas Maccabeus, and at one point, he
and his brother Jonathan fled from
Selucid forces across the river Jordan.
At this point, Josephus recounts how the
brothers and their rebel forces ran into
a group of Nabataeans.
These Nabataeans met them on friendly
terms and even warned them about
atrocities that the Selucids had been
committing in a nearby Jewish settlement.
Now, as for Judas Maccabeus and his
brother Jonathan,
they passed over the river Jordan, and
when they had gone three day’s journey,
they lighted upon the Nabataeans who
came to meet them peaceably,
and who told them how the affairs of
those in the land of Gilead stood, and
how many of them were in distress
and driven into garrisons and into the
cities of Galilee, and exhorted him to
make haste, to go against the foreigners,
and to endeavor to save his own
countrymen out of their hands.
To this exhortation Judas hearkened and
returned to the wilderness,
and in the first place
fell upon the inhabitants of Bosor and
took the city.
Again, this fragmentary glimpse is
fascinating but frustrating. The
Nabataeans seem to have had a
long-standing friendly relationship with
the Judaean people and were apparently
supportive of their rebellion.
It's possible that the Nabataeans,
clearly valuing their own independence,
viewed the Judaean struggle for freedom
with a great deal of sympathy.
But no doubt, they also enjoyed the
opportunity to cause trouble for the
Selucid Empire, their powerful rivals to
the north.
An inscription at the archaeological
site of Haluza in the Negev Desert
contains the first mention of the name
of a king of Nabataea.
This inscription, written in a very early
form of Nabataean, says only the
following.
This is the place which Nuthairu made for
the life of King Aretas, king of the
Nabataeans.
This King Aretas was the first king of
Nabataea that we can definitively put a
name to, and it's clear that by this time,
Nabataea was not just a tribal
confederacy but actually a kingdom.
Half a century later, by the year 129 BC,
we get another flashbulb
showing that Petra was now recognized as
a major regional capital.
One inscription from a Greek ambassador
named Moschio son of Kydimos came from
the city of Priene in modern day Turkey.
It recounts how Moschion traveled on
diplomatic missions around the region,
and mentions two cities in the same
breath;
the great city of Alexandria in Egypt,
and the city of Petra.
He acted as an envoy on behalf of the
people on many occasions,
both to kings and to cities, and he
performed all these embassies to the
advantage of the people.
The previous embassies he performed as a
free gift, but when he was sent by his
fatherland on official business to king
Ptolemaios in Alexandria and to Petra in
Arabia,
he stayed there for a longer time that
had been anticipated by the people.
It's clear that by this time, the tribal
peoples of Nabataea had grown into a
true regional power and gained the
respect of their neighbors.
They now directly controlled territory
across the Arabian Peninsula, into the
Negev Desert, and across Palestine, but
their zone of influence stretched even
further.
Their caravans arrived in countless
cities laden with goods and crossed the
seas to trade with faraway lands,
and as the power of the Nabataeans grew,
so did the magnificence of their stony
capital. Petra was now a hive of
construction, with its people carving
temples and tombs, directly imitating the
architectural styles of their powerful
Greek neighbors.
It's around this time, during the
first century BC, that the people of
Petra would construct the most
impressive monument from their unique
culture of sandstone-carving.
That's the enormous edifice known today
as the Khazneh, or the Great Treasury.
The towering construction known as the
Khazneh is today one of the most famous
buildings in the world.
It's thought to have been the mausoleum
of a Nabataean king, possibly Aretas II,
Obodas III, or his successor, Aretas IV.
But no inscriptions stand beside this
enormous carving to explain its purpose
or who built it.
Today, the Khazneh stands as a silent
testimony to the golden age of the
Nabataean kingdom, and it seems at every
point to have been designed for maximum
impact on those who saw it.
Ancient visitors to Petra would walk
along the narrow gully of the Siq,
winding through the towering walls of
sandstone,
and finally emerge into this spectacle
of sheer visual drama.
The towering colonnades and galleries of
the facade, a sight that still has its
intended impact on modern tourists to
this day,
more than two millennia after its
designers walked the earth.
At the time it was built, the ground
level beneath the Khazneh was about four
meters lower than it is today, and a
steep staircase led up to its pillared
doorway.
The design of the Khazneh marries the
Nabataean art of stone carving with Greek
architectural styles,
depicting Nabataean gods alongside Greek
deities like Tyche, god of fortune and
cities, and Egyptian gods like Isis.
It's clear that in this hybrid style, the
people of Petra were laying claim to a
status equal to the Greek empires that
surrounded them, and marking their city
as one of the great metropolises of the
world.
The monument was carved using iron
pickaxes and chisels, and today you can
still see the marks left by the
scaffolding of the workers who toiled
through endless hours and dangerous
conditions to bring its perfect
proportions into existence.
When the Khazneh was built, it would have
been remarkable to the citizens of Petra,
who had never seen anything like it in
their city.
But in the coming century, the building
would act as a model for several more
monuments.
Among these are the stone facades known
as the monastery, and another named the
Corinthian Tomb. But both of these
monuments are smaller, less ambitious, and
less beautifully-proportioned than the
towering facade of the Khazneh.
Thanks to visitors who passed through in
the coming centuries, we do know a great
amount about what the average citizen of
Petra would have experienced in their
everyday life.
The first century Greek writer and
geographer Strabo recounts the foods
enjoyed by the Nabataeans.
Most of the country is well-supplied
with fruits, except the olive. They use
sesame oil instead.
The sheep are white-fleeced and the oxen
are large, but the country produces no
horses.
Camels afford the service they require
instead of horses.
We can also find a reference to a
particular kind of fermented bread known
as Khubz al-ma’ al-Nabati’, or Nabataean
water bread, in a 10th century cookbook
by Ibn Sayyar al-Warraq.
Take seven and a half pounds of good-
-quality samidh flour
and sift it in a big wooden bowl.
Mix it with three ounces yeast and add
three ounces salt that has been
dissolved in water and strained.
Knead the mixture into a very firm dough,
as firm as stone, and press it well.
Cover the dough and let it ferment.
With the help of some oil of hulled
sesame seeds,
divide the dough into portions,
light the tannur,
and wait until the fire starts to
smolder gently.
Rub each portion of the dough with two
dirhams sesame oil or olive oil,
then
flatten it by hand and stick it to the
inside of a smoldering oven.
It's likely that the Nabataeans would
have done their baking early in the
morning,
before the heat of the day would make
lighting a fire unbearable. We can
imagine the smoke of these fires
drifting through the shaded gullies of
the city in the cool desert mornings, the
smells of baking bread, yeast, and
sizzling sesame oil filling the air.
According to sources of the time, walking
the streets of Petra would have been a
colorful experience.
The writer Strabo recounts the many
colored clothes of the city's
inhabitants and the many smells that
would have wafted through the streets.
They go without tunics, with girdles
around their loins and with slippers on
their feet, even the kings, though in
their case the color is purple.
Some things are imported wholly from
other countries, but others not
altogether so, especially in the case of
those that are native products, as for
example, gold and silver, and most of the
aromatics, whereas brass and iron, as
also purple garb, styrax, crocus, costaria,
embossed works, paintings, and molded
works are not produced in their country.
Nabataean religion revolved mostly
around the worship of a god named
Dushara,
a kind of father god like the Greek Zeus,
who was responsible for justice and
seems to have been associated with the
sun.
He was often represented by simple
square-shaped blocks of stone.
Nabataeans would apparently offer animal
sacrifices to Dushara,
and would give him offerings in the form
of Petra's most abundant trade commodity;
incense.
They worship the sun, building an altar
on top of the house and pouring
libations on it daily, and burning
frankincense.
No doubt the temples of Petra would have
sent great clouds of frankincense, myrrh,
and other aromatics wafting out into its
streets to mix with the smells of camels
and goats, cooking food, and smoldering
charcoal ovens.
Many of the peoples of Nabataea were
still transient, traveling constantly all
year round from trade post to trade post.
But in order to maintain a sense of
community, it seems they did all gather
every year for a kind of festival part
market, part ceremony, and part feast
where the disparate tribes of the
Nabataeans would come together to
exchange goods,
talk, tell stories, and of course, drink
wine.
Strabo describes the sights of one of
these Nabataean celebrations,
and he's struck by the noticeable lack
of slavery in the city, something that
would have been remarkable to someone
who lived in the Roman Empire.
But when the time draws near for the
national gathering at which those who
dwell round about are accustomed to meet,
they travel to this meeting, leaving on a
certain rock their possessions and their
old men, also their women and their
children.
Since they have but few slaves, they are
served by their kinsfolk for the most
part or by one another, or by themselves
so that the custom extends even to their
kings. They prepare common meals together
in groups of thirteen persons, and they have
two girl singers for each banquet.
The king holds many drinking bouts in
magnificent style, but no one drinks more
than eleven cupfuls, each time using a
different golden cup.
The king is so democratic that in
addition to serving himself, he sometimes
even serves the rest himself in his turn.
The fact that we have to largely rely on
the accounts of others when recreating
the daily lives of the Nabataeans is
frustrating for any scholar of the
period. But in fact, the Nabataeans did
leave behind one great body of
literature; that's the inscriptions
carved into the stones of their great
tombs in their own distinctive script.
Many of the most complete of these can
be found at the site of Hegra, now in the
northwest of modern Saudi Arabia.
Hegra was founded by the Nabataean king,
Aretas IV, in the final years of the first
century BC, and he named it the kingdom's
second capital.
In some ways, its carved tombs are more
dramatic and impressive than those at
Petra, since they can be seen from great
distances,
looming on the horizon of the flat
desert plain.
The most famous of these is known in
Arabic as Qasr al-Farid, or the Lonely
Castle.
It is as finely carved as anything found
at Petra, and it forms a particularly
haunting monument to the city that once
stood here,
now buried beneath the sands.
The tomb inscriptions of Hegra are
remarkable texts.
Many of them are extremely weathered
since they have been exposed to the
desert winds for more than 2,000 years,
but many are also perfectly clear and
legible.
These tomb inscriptions often contain
warnings of curses from the gods that
would land upon any tomb robbers, but
they were also binding legal documents,
ensuring that the tomb remained the
property of a single family down the
generations, with infractions punishable
by fines.
This inscription from one Hegra tomb is
a prime example of this hybrid form.
This is the tomb and platform and
enclosure from which Hawshabu, son of
Nafiyu, son of Alkuf the Taymanite, made
for himself and his children, and Habbu
his mother,
and Rufu and Aftiyu, his sisters
and their children --
inviolable according to the nature of
inviolability among the Nabataeans and
Salamians forever,
and may Dushara curse anybody who buries
in this tomb
anyone except those inscribed above,
or sells it,
or buys it, or gives it in pledge or
leases it,
or makes a gift of it,
or disposes of it,
and whoever does other than what is
written above
shall be liable to the god Dushara
for the full price of a thousand Selas,
and to our lord King Haretat
for the same amount.
In the month of Shebat,
the 13th year of Haretite,
king of the Nabataeans,
lover of his people.
Inside the tomb, the niches are marked
with a shorter inscription.
These are the two burial niches of
Hawshabu, son of Nafiyu,
and Abdalga and Habbu, his children,
and may he who separates night from day
curse whoever removes them forever.
These tomb inscriptions all more or less
follow this format, and while they are
limited in what they can teach us, they
do take on a remarkable significance and
even poignancy when we consider that
these are the only texts left behind
actually written by Nabataeans.
Theirs is a culture whose only surviving
testament is their tombstones.
In these brief carved messages, we can
learn little glimmers of information.
We learn about the names of their gods
and get some sense of how they thought
of them. We can hear Nabataean names, and
sometimes we can recreate their family
trees, their wives and sisters and
children.
We can hear hints of a society in which
the temple and the king both held some
kind of independent authority,
and where a complex legal system was
enforced with laws and fines.
In some of these inscriptions, credit is
even given to the masons who carved the
tomb, giving some hint as to the
importance that these artists held in
this city of stone.
In the month of Nisan, the 36th year of
Haretite, king of the Nabataeans, love of his
people, Aftah, son of Abdo-Bodat,
and Wahbu, son of Afsa, and Huru,
the masons,
made this tomb.
Since the professions of the people
buried in the tombs are usually listed,
we also get a wonderful account of the
variety of ways that a Nabataean could
make their living in the cities of Hegra
and Petra. Malkion the omen-diviner; Sullay
the governor; Aydu the prefect; Manotu the exorcist priest;
Kahlan the physician; Sadallahi
the centurion.
All of these people lived full lives in
the streets and markets and houses of
these cities. They had friends, families,
lovers, secrets, and dreams, and now all
that is left are the faded inscriptions
in stone, slowly disappearing under the
desert winds and rain.
Despite their centuries of domination of
trade in this region, the Nabataeans
would eventually encounter an enemy that
could neither be defeated nor bought
off.
That was a growing imperial power based
on a peninsula far off in the central
Mediterranean that would soon expand to
its most enormous height,
encompassing the entire Mediterranean
Sea
and the lands of Arabia beyond.
That was the power of Rome.
By the end of the first century BC, the
Roman Republic had given way to the
Roman Empire, a confident expanding
military power.
By this time, Rome had conquered Judaea
and installed a tyrannical puppet king,
Herod the Great, to rule it as a colony.
In 30 BC,
Rome also conquered the Greek kingdom of
Ptolemaic Egypt and brought Roman
legions to the banks of the Nile.
Then, like so many empires before
them, the Romans began to look hungrily
east to the rich lands of Nabataea
and the incense fields of Arabia.
Rome was an enormous consumer of incense.
Roman temples burned frankincense and
myrrh as part of their rituals, and with
the rapid growth of the empire, these
temples would now stretch across all of
Europe, from Tunisia to Scotland, from
Morocco to Mesopotamia.
At the height of its trade, it's
estimated that each year, well over a
million kilograms of frankincense was
imported into the Roman Empire.
Considering the exorbitant 25%
tax that the Nabataeans charged on this,
it's no wonder that the Romans soon
began to consider ways of cutting out
the middleman and taking charge of the
incense trade themselves.
In the year 26 BC, the new Roman emperor
Augustus sent one of his prefects who
had been stationed in Roman Egypt to
explore the south of Arabia, accompanied
with a small expeditionary force,
and to establish new direct trade routes
with the people who lived there.
This man's name was Aelius Gallus.
The geographer Strabo recalls the
purpose of this expedition.
Aelius Gallus conceived the purpose of
winning the Arabians over to himself,
or of subjugating them.
Another consideration was the report
which had prevailed from all time, that
they were very wealthy and that they
sold aromatics and the most valuable
stones for gold and silver,
but never expended with outsiders any
part of what they received in exchange,
for he expected either to deal with
wealthy friends
or to master wealthy enemies.
Curiously, the Nabataeans seemed all too
eager to help the Romans on their
expedition.
They even offered to send one of their
own people as a guide.
He was encouraged also by the
expectation of assistance from the
Nabataeans, since they were friendly and
promised to cooperate with him in every
way.
Considering that the Nabataeans stood to
lose a great deal if Gallus' expedition
was a success,
the Romans should perhaps have been more
suspicious of these offers of help,
but apparently they were not.
The guide that the Nabataean king sent
to help this Roman expedition was a man
named Syllaeus, a cunning politician high
up in the Nabataean establishment.
Syllaeus faced an unenviable task;
he had to appear to cooperate with the
Roman expedition so as not to arouse the
anger of the mighty empire, but the
Nabataean king had made quite clear that
the expedition must be a failure.
Trapped between the Romans and his own
king, Syllaeus must have experienced
sleepless nights as he guided the Roman
army through the deserts of Arabia.
Strabo recounts how the mission unfolded.
Gallus set out on the expedition, but he
was deceived by the Nabataean
administrator Syllaeus,
who, although he had promised to be guide
on the march
and to supply all needs and to cooperate
with him,
acted treacherously in all things
and pointed out neither a safe voyage
along the coast
nor a safe journey by land,
misguiding him through places that had
no roads
and by circuitous routes,
and through regions destitute of
everything,
or along rocky shores that had no
harbors or through waters that were
shallow or full of submarine rocks,
and particularly in places of that kind
the flood tides,
and also the ebb tides
caused very great distress.
It's clear that at every turn, the
Nabataean Syllaeus worked to frustrate
and weaken Aelius Gallus' expedition,
using every deception available to him.
After many experiences and hardships, he
arrived in 14 days at Leuke Kome, in the
land of the Nabataeans, although he had
lost many of his boats,
some of these being lost, crews and all,
on accounts of difficult sailing,
but not on account of any enemy.
This was caused by the treachery of
Syllaeus,
who said that there was no way for an
army to go to Leuke Kome by land,
and yet,
camel traders travel back and forth from
Petra to this place
in safety
and ease.
The expedition of Aelius Gallus would
take six months to work its weary way up
the coast of southern Arabia, suffering
from disease, shipwrecks, even eating
poisoned herbs and drinking tainted
water, so that the soldiers suffered from
sickness and disease.
They would travel around in circles
across the stony desert wastes, and take
the longest possible routes along rough
terrain, baking in the searing Arabian
sun,
suffering from heat stroke and fatigue.
Finally, with only a fraction of his
original force remaining, Gallus was
forced to admit defeat.
Although he was within reach of his goal,
he now feared that if he pushed on, none
of them would survive, and he feared that
the journey home would take another six
months.
He ordered his men to turn around
and march back along the desert roads,
and it's only on the way home that he
realized the trick that had been played
on him.
He was indeed only two days’ journey from
the country that produced aromatics, as
informed by his captives,
but he used up six months’ time on his
marches because of bad guidance,
and he realized the fact when he turned
back,
when at last he had learned the plot
against him and had gone back by other
roads.
On his return, he accomplished the whole
journey within sixty days.
He'd used up six months in his first
journey.
It's not recorded whether Syllaeus stuck
around to face the anger of the Roman
commander or whether he slunk away in
the night.
Strabo recounts the sorry sight of the
expedition as it returned to its base in
Alexandria, empty-handed.
Thence he carried his army across the Myus
Harbor within eleven days,
and with all who had been fortunate
enough to survive, landed in Alexandria.
The rest he had lost
not in wars, but from sickness and
fatigue, and hunger and bad roads,
for only seven men perished in war.
For these reasons, this expedition did
not profit us to a great extent in our
knowledge of these regions.
For his part, Syllaeus seems to have
returned to Petra to a hero's welcome.
The failure of this disastrous
expedition set Rome back significantly.
The empire would soon be convulsed by
civil wars, and was soon far too
distracted to think about expanding any
further into Arabia.
Syllaeus' actions would buy his people
more than a century of independence, but
Rome's civil wars would not last forever,
and for the kingdom of Nabataea, the
writing was on the wall.
As the first millennium BC became the
first millennium AD, Rome officially
absorbed Judaea, Mesopotamia, and Syria
into its enormous empire.
Nabataea gradually found itself
surrounded by this overwhelming power,
and the era of its existence as an
independent kingdom was soon to come to
an end.
The last king of the Nabataeans was a
man named Rabbel II,
who had ruled for thirty-six years.
When he died in the year 106 AD, the
Roman emperor Trajan ordered two legions
to march into the region and capture the
lands of Nabataea.
There doesn't seem to have been any
particular pretext for the invasion;
Rabbel had a legitimate heir named Obodas
who was ready to take the throne, but
it's clear that Rome didn't want to
waste its opening.
The man who led this campaign was the
Roman governor of Syria, a man named
Cornelius Palma.
Under his command, the Third Cyrenaica
legion moves north from Egypt into Petra,
while the Sixth Ferrata legion, a Syrian
garrison unit, moved south to occupy the
town of Bostra.
As far as we can tell, the Romans faced
little resistance.
In fact, the campaign was so
underwhelming that the Roman historian
Cassius Dio, normally a colorful and
detailed writer, had only the following
to say about it.
About this time,
Palma, the governor of Syria, subdued the
part of Arabia around Petra and made it
subject to the Romans.
This sparse report is wedged in between
colorful accounts of Trajan's campaigns
against the Dacians and his spectacles
involving 10,000 gladiators.
Even the Roman coins minted to celebrate
the victory seem to reflect the
understated nature of the campaign. They
were marked with the words ‘Arabia
adquisita’
rather than the more normal ‘capta’.
For the Romans, Arabia had not been
captured, but simply acquired.
Some units of the Nabataean's elite royal
guard do seem to have resisted the
invaders,
but for the most part, the regular troops
saw no point in fighting the inevitable.
Roman legions marched into Petra, and the
age of Nabataean independence finally
came to an end.
Rome would name the province they
founded there Arabia Petraea after the
great city, and the period of Roman Petra
began.
From what we can tell, it seems that for
the average citizen of the Nabataean
kingdom, the annexation by Rome had
little effect on their lives, at least at
first.
The historian Jane Taylor describes the
situation.
It was only the top management that
changed, the governors and a handful of
officials.
In due course, the old royal army was
absorbed into the Roman auxiliary forces
as six portraying cohorts,
a total of 6,000 men.
As for the non-military majority,
landowners, stonemasons, ceramicists,
scribes, priests, musicians, jugglers, or
minor officials, most stayed where they
were, paid their taxes to the new
authority,
and pursued the accustomed daily pattern
of their lives, more or less unchanged.
Usually when Rome captured an area, they
would set about immediately building new
aqueducts and water systems,
but conspicuously in Petra, they left the
Nabataean water system virtually
untouched.
This suggests that they saw little room
for improvement to the already skillful
engineering.
To ensure the security of their new
conquest and perhaps with bitter
memories of Aelius Gallus' expedition
still in their minds, the Romans built a
highway through the entire territory.
They named this the Via Nova Traiana, or
Trajan's New Road, a 400-kilometer
highway connecting Petra and Bostra to
the sea port of Aqaba on the Red Sea.
The road was lined with forts, ensuring a
permanent control of the trade routes, to
the rich incense fields of the south,
and meaning that the Romans could now
move their forces with ease.
One Roman citizen, Aelius Aristides, who
lived during the second century AD
in the Roman province of Asia, wrote the
following description of the times and
shows that the Romans believed that the
uncontrollable lands of Arabia had
finally been pacified.
Wars have so far vanished as to be
legendary affairs of the past.
Now, a man simply travels from one
country to another as though it were his
native land.
We are no longer frightened by the
Cilician Pass or by the narrow, sandy
tracks that lead from Arabia to Egypt.
We are not dismayed by the height of
mountains or by the vast breadth of
rivers or by inhospitable tribes or
barbarians.
To be a Roman citizen is a sufficient
guarantee of personal safety.
For the city of Petra, the period of
Roman annexation would be the beginning
of the end.
Over the coming centuries, Petra would
ultimately be undone by cultural and
economic shifts that swept the whole
world along with them.
In the third and fourth centuries, the
Roman Empire would undergo some dramatic
changes.
The cult of Jesus Christ, once a small
fringe group of worshipers based around
the veneration of an executed Jewish
prophet, had grown to become a real
threat to Roman power.
For a time, Christianity was outlawed in
the empire, and during the reign of the
emperor Diocletian, records show that the
Christians of Petra were punished for
their refusal to sacrifice to Roman gods.
Many of them were sent to die by forced
labor in the nearby Roman copper mines
of Phaino.
Christianity was finally adopted by the
emperor Constantine, and would become the
major belief system of the late Roman
Empire.
But as Christian modes of worship spread,
the way that people conducted ceremonies
also changed,
and this would have a dramatic effect on
the commodities that people consumed and
on the people of Petra.
While today we think of incense as an
integral part of worship in the Catholic
and orthodox churches, early Christians
were keen to emphasize the difference
between themselves and the old pagan
temples.
For this reason, Christians at this time
did not use incense in their ceremonies.
As pagan temples were shut down, demand
for incense crashed, and the price began
to fall.
This broader cultural and economic
change came at the same time as Egyptian
ports began to supersede the land-based
trade routes for incense, spices, and
silks.
As an independent kingdom, the Nabataeans
had jealously guarded their source of
frankincense, but with Nabataea conquered,
the Romans began extracting incense by
the more efficient route; carrying goods
by sea to Egypt rather than on the
arduous desert roads by land.
As a result, the very thing that the
Nabataeans had feared came to pass.
The importance of Petra as a trading hub
began to fall.
Although it had given its name to the
province of Arabia Petraea, the Romans
also seemed to have had little use for
the Rose City.
The very things that had made Petra
attractive to the Nabataeans, that is how
remote, hidden, and difficult to reach it
was, made it an unattractive place for a
Roman administration which needed good
links to the capital. The Romans
increasingly conducted the running of
the province from the more northern and
well-connected town of Bostra,
and the prominence of Petra as the
administrative center of the region fell
even further.
Petra at this time must have been a sad
place.
The former markets and workshops that
had once boomed with life and noise must
have grown smaller every year as fewer
and fewer caravans passed through. The
fine cliffside houses, where once
children ran and played, where families
hung up their laundry and watched the
sunset,
would have become abandoned one by one,
home only to desert bats and wild dogs
that would have howled to one another at
night
in the gradually emptying valleys.
Despite its declining importance, Petra
may still have continued as an important
trading spot were it not for the events
of the 18th of May, in the year 363
AD.
It was the middle of the night when the
first tremors began,
a shuddering and shaking in the earth,
accompanied by a low rumble.
Somewhere deep in the faultline of the
Red Sea,
the edges of the African and Arabian
Plates gave way against one another, and
an earthquake shook the region.
This would be known as the Galilee
Earthquake, a pair of severe tremors on
the 18th and 19th of May in the year 363.
One letter, thought to be written by the
bishop Cyril of Jerusalem, recalls the
tremendous impact of the earthquake.
This event took place on Monday at the
third hour,
and partly at the ninth hour of the
night.
There was a great loss of life here.
The land was shaken
and mighty prodigies took place,
and fire consumed great numbers of them.
The land shook considerably and there
were great tremors in the towns round
about.
Many Christians, too, living in these
regions, as well as the majority of the
Jews, perished at that scourge, and not
just in the earthquake,
but also as a result of fire and in the
heavy rain they had.
Cyril goes on to list the settlements
most damaged by the tremors, and notes
that more than half of the city of Petra
was destroyed.
Now we should like to write down for you
the names of the towns that were
overthrown;
Beit Gubrin,
more than half of it, part of Baishan, the
whole of Sebastia and its territory, the
whole of Nikopolis and its territory,
more than half of Petra, part of Tiberias,
too,
and its territory.
Haifa flowed with blood for three days.
Another chronicler named Thomas from the
Rhesaina region wrote the following
account, in which he views the earthquake
as a punishment from god for the
continuing pagan worship in the region.
At that time, the Lord was angry with the
cities of the pagans and Jews and the
Samaritans and of the false teachings in
the south that are joined in with the
madness of the pagan Julian,
and anger went out from the Lord's
presence and began to destroy the
unclean and pagan cities because they
had defiled them with blood which they
shed unjustly in them.
It began to destroy the cities, 21 in
number, some of which were overturned,
some collapsed, and yet others survived
in the month of Iyyar, of the year 674,
and on the 27th day in that month, in the
month of Haziran.
Archaeological evidence in Petra
supports the picture of a sudden and
devastating disaster.
One house excavated by archaeologists
was reduced to a pile of rubble around
this time.
Beneath the collapsed roof, a great
number of everyday domestic items were
found;
lamps,
shattered ceramics and glass, spindles
and coins,
even a copper pot with an iron handle.
Near the door, a smashed pot contained 85
small-denomination copper coins,
apparently kept there for everyday
expenses.
The fact that these were never reclaimed
or even looted
suggests that the damage in the city was
too great for its declining population
to even pick through,
let alone rebuild from.
Many of Petra's great public buildings
were severely hit by the earthquake.
The so-called Temple of the Winged Lions,
the building known as the Great Temple,
and the public theater were all damaged,
and they would never be repaired.
Particularly devastating seems to have
been the earthquake's effect on the
city's water systems.
Subterranean pipes were cracked and
would have leaked their precious water
into the sands, and some of its aqueducts
split open.
Dams designed to hold in reservoirs of
rainwater collapsed, causing widespread
flooding and severely depleting the
city's supplies.
Petra's capacity to support life was
directly linked to its capacity to store
water, and with the complicated system
now coming apart at the seams, its water
and the city's remaining life would now
leach away into the dust of the desert.
It's clear that some of Petra's people
did creep back to repopulate the city
after the earthquake.
In the area known as the Colonnaded
Street, archaeology shows that some of
the earthquake debris was cleared away,
and a shanty town of simple shops and
shelters was built out of material
reclaimed from the rubble.
But the destruction of the city's water
system meant that the annual flash
floods were no longer being controlled.
We can see the evidence of these floods
in the build-up of silt and sand in the
floors of these humble buildings,
as the waters crash down from the rocks
in the rainy season, flooding everyone's
homes, and then giving way to months of
punishing drought.
Some domestic structures were rebuilt
after the earthquake,
and it's clear people tried to continue
their lives.
They even constructed some new churches,
although they were largely built from
material scavenged from other destroyed
monuments.
But in the early 5th century, another
earthquake struck and after that, most of
the grand houses were abandoned for good.
The dream of Petra had died, and the city
gradually fell into disrepair and ruin.
Despite all of this damage, people did
continue to live in reduced numbers
around the ruins of Petra,
and it would continue as a humble
caravan stop for several more centuries.
People continued to live in the
hollowed-out cave houses,
and farmed on the terraces of its hills
right up to the modern era.
As the Eastern Roman Empire morphed into
the Byzantine Empire, the old city of
Petra was even named the capital of the
province of Palaestina Tertia,
and several churches were built in and
around the city.
In one of them, 140 papyruses were
discovered, which contained mainly
contracts dated up to the year 590,
showing that people were still living in
the city.
According to the writer John Moschus,
Petra even had a bishop in the first
decades of the 7th century, a man named
Athenogenes.
But some time before the year 687,
the declining fortunes of the city meant
that the position ceased to exist.
When Arab armies, inspired by the new
faith of Islam and the teachings of the
prophet Muhammad swept across the region,
Petra doesn't seem to have featured in
their interests at all. It's not
mentioned once in the narratives of the
Muslim conquest, and nor does it appear
in any early Islamic records.
As power in this region underwent
another
of its great reshufflings, it seems the
city of Petra was finally abandoned for
good.
The Arabic that these new rulers spoke
was directly descended from the old
Nabataean spoken by the ancient peoples
of Petra, but to these new conquerors, the
Rose City was an irrelevance, a city of
tombs and ruins lost among the desert
stones.
The Muslims who came after and built
their own empires in the region were
struck by the incredible sight of these
monumental stones
still left at the sites of Hegra and
Petra.
To explain them, they told stories about
a tribe that they called the Thamud, who
were punished by god for refusing to
listen to a prophet named
Salih. One version of this is given in
the Quran, in the Surah Al-A’raf,
or the Chapter of the Heights.
And they flouted the commandment of
their lord,
and they said,
oh Salih,
bring upon us that thou threatenest
if thou art indeed of those sent from
Allah.
So the earthquake seized them,
and morning found them prostrate in their
dwelling place.
And Salih
turned from them and said,
oh my people, I delivered my lord's
message unto you and gave you good
advice,
but ye love not good advisors.
As for the earth, we spread it out and
placed it upon its firm mountains
and caused everything to grow there in
perfect balance.
We made in it means of sustenance for
you and others.
We send fertilizing winds and bring down
rain from the sky for you to drink.
But the residents of the stone valley
also denied the messengers.
We gave them our signs,
but they turned away from them.
They carved their homes in the mountains,
feeling secure,
but the mighty blast overtook them in
the morning,
and all they achieved
was of no help to them.
For these later people, the towering
ruins of the Nabataean cities became
warnings about excessive pride, and a
reminder that the power of nature or the
power of god can always undo the works
of man.
For others, the ruins inspired poetry.
I want to end the episode with a reading
from one of the great pre-Islamic poets,
a man named Tarafa.
He wrote poetry that responded to the
ruined sights that littered the horizon
of the Arab Peninsula left by peoples
like the Nabataeans.
In this poem, he describes how the sight
of these ruins
leads him to think about the transience
and the injustice of life.
As you listen, imagine what it would feel
like to live in the great city of Petra
during its final days, to watch the life
slowly ebb from the city around you, as
the caravans arrived in fewer and fewer
numbers across the sands.
Imagine the earthquakes cracking the
great stones of the city, the feeling of
hopelessness as the water systems broke,
and no one left knew how to repair them,
as people
departed across the desert to begin new
lives in other places.
Imagine watching the sands creep in to
cover the streets, the homes, and markets,
the stables and the workshops, finally
leaving nothing in the city but its
tombs.
The ruins Khawla left on the mottled
flatlands of Tamhad appear and fade
like the trace of a tattoo on the back
of a hand.
There, my friends halted tall camels over
me, saying
don't lose yourself in grief, man. Endure.
A man's soul flies to his throat in fear
and he imagines impending ruin, though no
one stalks his evening journey, waiting.
Death does not miss the brave -
- its slackened ropes around him, hand
around the twisted coils.
A generous man quenches his soul while
he is still alive.
I see the tomb of the hoarder, panting
for his wealth, like the tomb of the
wasteful evildoer; both the same.
Two heaps of earth were silent slabs of
hard, death stone piled up upon them.
I see death choose the generous and the
noble,
while picking over the best part of the
hardened, rich man's spoil.
I see a life, a treasure,
shrinking every night,
shrunken by days and time,
then gone.
Thank you once again for listening to
The Fall of Civilizations Podcast.
I'd like to thank my voice actors for
this episode;
Nick Denton, Jay Forrester, Shem Jacobs,
Annie Kelly, and Paul Casselle.
I love to hear your thoughts and
responses on Twitter, so please come and
tell me what you thought.
You can follow me @PaulMMCooper, and
if you'd like updates about the podcast,
announcements about new episodes, as well
as images, maps, and reading suggestions,
you can follow the podcast at Fall_of
Civ_Pod with underscores separating the
words.
This podcast can only keep going with
the support of our generous subscribers
on Patreon.
You keep me running, you help me cover my
costs, and you let me dedicate more time
to researching, writing, recording, and
editing to get the episodes out to you
faster and bring as much life and detail
to them as possible.
I want to thank all my subscribers for
making this happen.
If you enjoyed this episode, please
consider heading onto patreon.com
forward slash fall of civilizations
underscore podcast,
or just Google
Fall of Civilizations Patreon. That's
P-A-T-R-E-O-N.
For now, goodbye, and thanks for listening.